Hello and welcome to this Python tutorial.
So, we just took care of the data pre-processing phase
and now we're ready to train the SOM.
So how are we going to do that?
Well, we have two options.
The first option is to implement the SOM from scratch
and the second option is to use a code,
a class made by another developer,
exactly like when we use cyclic learning
that is made by other developers.
Except that here, the self-organizing map
doesn't have an implementation in cyclic learning.
So we'll need to take it from another developer.
So which option are we going to take?
Well that depends on what is available online
and if some good implementations of self-organizing maps
were made by developers.
And fortunately there is one excellent implementation
of SOM, which is this one, MiniSom 1.0.
So, the developer is use up vertically
and it is a numPy based implementation
of self-organizing maps.
The license is Creative Commons by 3.0
which means that we can share the codes,
adapt the codes, well, do whatever we want with the code
and that's why we can totally use it to build our SOM.
Alright, so that's an important reason
why I'm choosing this implementation here.
And the second reason is that
I would like to start this volume two
on supervised deep learning, rather slowly
because then we will have a huge job
implementing the other models,
the other deep learning models.
So we will build the next deep learning models
that is Boltzmann machines and stacked to our encoders
almost from scratch.
That is that we will make our own class
and this will be excellent for you
because you will learn how to manipulate classes,
objects, methods.
Well basically all the advanced features of Python
that are quite essential in deep learning
because you will not always use libraries.
Sometimes you will need to implement your own models
from scratch.
So that's why right now we take it easy
by using this MiniSom implementation
and we save up some energy for the last parts,
where we'll make our own robust deep learning models.
Alright, so now that we agree on using
this MiniSom implementation of self-organizing maps.
Well let's go back to Python
and let's start training the SOM.
Okay, so the first thing we need to do is
to import MiniSom of course.
And by the way you have to make sure
that in your working directory folder in file explorer
you get this MiniSom.py which is
the implementation of self-organizing map itself
made by this developer.
So you just need to have this MiniSom.py Python file
in your working directory folder that contains the dataset.
And if that's the case,
you are ready to import this MiniSom
in the code that we were about to make right now.
Alright, so let's import the class
and the class is actually called MiniSom,
with capital M.
Mini, capital, S om.
Alright, so that's the class.
And we import this MiniSom class
from the MiniSom Python file.
That is exactly this file.
MinSom.py.
So we can already try to see if that works.
Here we go, MiniSom is imported.
Perfect.
Now let's create an object of this class
and this object is going to be
the self-organizing map itself,
that is going to be trained on x and not x and y
because we're doing some unsupervised learning.
That is, we are trained to identify some patterns
inside the independent variables
that are contained in x
and we don't use the information of the dependent variable.
We don't consider that information in y here.
So let's create this object
and since this object is the self-organizing map itself,
we're gonna call it Som and equals,
and then we call the class MiniSom and parenthesis.
And now let's see what arguments we need to input.
So as we can see here, the first arguments are x and y
which are of course the dimensions of the grid
to self-organizing map.
So here the choice is pretty arbitrary.
We can choose whatever dimensions we want
for our self-organizing map.
It must not be too small because
we want to get the outliers pretty in evidence
and only if you want to be very accurate
with your search of outliers well,
you can make a bigger map.
But here, we don't have that much observations.
We don't have that much customers
in our dataset Credit card applications,
so we're just gonna make a 10 by 10 grid
and therefore, here we're going to input x equals 10
and y equals 10.
Then the next parameter is input link,
which of course corresponds to the number of features
we have in our dataset.
Not in the original dataset here,
but in x because we are training the SOM object on x
and x contains, remember 14 attributes plus the customer ID.
We don't really need to consider the customer ID
because it has of course no significance on the patterns,
but we're gonna keep it because then
we want to identify the potential cheaters
and for this we will need the customer ID.
So input length will be equal to 14 plus one equals 15.
Then sigma, so remember from the intuition lecture
that sigma is the radius
of the different neighborhoods in the grid.
So we will keep its default value 1.0
and then we have the learning rate,
which remember is this hyper-parameter
that decides by how much the weights are updated
during each iteration.
So the higher is the learning rate,
the faster there will be convergence
and the lower is the learning rate,
the longer the self-organizing map
will take time to be built.
And so same here, we're gonna keep it to default value 0.5
and then finally we have a decay function parameter
that can be used to improve the convergence.
But here we're going to leave it to none
and not use a decay.
This will be perfectly fine with these values
of the hyperparameters, sigma and learning rate.
Okay, so we have everything we need.
We don't need a random seed.
That will be fine as well.
And therefore, let's input the parameters.
So we said x equals 10, y equals 10
so we have a 10 by 10 grid.
Then input len is the number of our features in x.
So that's 15.
Then sigma, we keep the default value to 1.0
and finally we also keep the default value
for the learning rate,
which is 0.5.
And perfect, our SOM objects is ready to be created.
So what about creating it now?
I'm going to select this line and execute
and perfect, the objective is well created.
And now, what we're gonna do
is of course train this self-organizing map object on x.
But before we do that,
we have to do something very important.
It's to initialize the weights.
Because remember, if we go back to the algorithm
of the self-organizing map,
well we can see here that step three
is to randomly initialize the values of the weight vectors
to small numbers close to zero, but not zero.
And then we can train the whole algorithm.
But we need to do that not only in theory
but also on Python.
So to do this,
we're gonna take our object, SOM,
and then dot.
And here we're gonna use a method made by this developer,
that is the MiniSom.py Python file.
You can check it out by the way.
And this method is random weights underscore in it.
Here it is.
So that's the method that will initialize the weights.
And inside this method, we just need to input the data.
That is x, our data on which the model will be trained.
And then one last line.
The last line is about using another method,
which is of course the method to train
the self-organizing map on x.
And this method is called Train Random.
And of course, this is the method that will apply
all the different steps here from step four to step nine
and of course by repeating steps four to nine
for many iterations.
And we will specify in this Train Random method,
the number of iterations to train our SOM.
So let's do it.
We take our SOM object again som.
And now we use the train underscore random method,
parenthesis and inside the parenthesis,
as you can see, we need to input two arguments.
The first one is data.
So again, that's x because we are training the SOM on x.
And the second argument is number of iterations.
Number of iteration, and of course
that's the number of iterations.
We want to repeat steps four to nine.
And so here we're gonna try with a hundred iterations
that will be way enough for our dataset.
So let's input the parameter,
first is data equals x.
And then num underscore iteration equals 100
and that's ready.
So first we're going to select this line
and execute to randomly initialize the weights.
And now let's select this line and execute
to train the self-organizing map on x.
And here we go.
That didn't take a while because we have a small dataset
with this also works very well on larger datasets.
And so now basically ourself-organizing map is trained
on our matrix of features x
and the patterns are already identified.
But of course, now we need to make something
even more important.
It's to visualize the results,
to identify the outline neurons inside the map.
And so to do this,
we will simply plot the self-organizing map,
and that's exactly what we're gonna do in the next tutorial.
Until then, enjoy deep learning.